README.md, before:

# oral-history-collections-template

digital collection base enhanced with OHD features

<https://www.lib.uidaho.edu/digital/>

A highly customized version of [CollectionBuilder-CSV](https://github.com/CollectionBuilder/collectionbuilder-csv) used to generate University of Idaho Library Digital Collections.

The main branch represents our base collection template.
Additional branches contain a variety of individual collections with customized metadata and features.
Updates to the main branch can be merged into the collection branches to maintain the centralized template.

This repository is specifically for building U of I Library projects and trails behind development of the general [CollectionBuilder-CSV](https://github.com/CollectionBuilder/collectionbuilder-csv) template.
If you are interested in this approach, please visit [CollectionBuilder](https://collectionbuilder.github.io/) to learn more!

----------

## CollectionBuilder 

<https://collectionbuilder.github.io/>

CollectionBuilder is a project of University of Idaho Library's [Digital Initiatives](https://www.lib.uidaho.edu/digital/) and the [Center for Digital Inquiry and Learning](https://cdil.lib.uidaho.edu) (CDIL) following the [Lib-Static](https://lib-static.github.io/) methodology. 
Powered by the open source static site generator [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) and a modern static web stack, it puts collection metadata to work building beautiful sites.

The basic theme is created using [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/).
Metadata visualizations are built using open source libraries such as [DataTables](https://datatables.net/), [Leafletjs](http://leafletjs.com/), [Spotlight gallery](https://github.com/nextapps-de/spotlight), [lazysizes](https://github.com/aFarkas/lazysizes), and [Lunr.js](https://lunrjs.com/).
Object metadata is exposed using [Schema.org](http://schema.org) and [Open Graph protocol](http://ogp.me/) standards.

## License
 
This license does *NOT* include any objects or images used in digital collections, which may have individually applied licenses described by a "rights" field.
CollectionBuilder code is licensed [MIT](https://github.com/CollectionBuilder/collectionbuilder-csv/blob/master/LICENSE). 
This license does not include external dependencies included in the `assets/lib` directory, which are covered by their individual licenses.

Commit message:

add note about deleted photo items in read.me

README.md, after:

# rwhp notes

- deleted-items.csv lists a set of photograph items that do not currently have an audio element / oral history (as of March 2024). These items are digitally preserved in the Spec partition of the Archive Drive.

# oral-history-collections-template

digital collection base enhanced with OHD features

<https://www.lib.uidaho.edu/digital/>

A highly customized version of [CollectionBuilder-CSV](https://github.com/CollectionBuilder/collectionbuilder-csv) used to generate University of Idaho Library Digital Collections.

The main branch represents our base collection template.
Additional branches contain a variety of individual collections with customized metadata and features.
Updates to the main branch can be merged into the collection branches to maintain the centralized template.

This repository is specifically for building U of I Library projects and trails behind development of the general [CollectionBuilder-CSV](https://github.com/CollectionBuilder/collectionbuilder-csv) template.
If you are interested in this approach, please visit [CollectionBuilder](https://collectionbuilder.github.io/) to learn more!

----------

## CollectionBuilder 

<https://collectionbuilder.github.io/>

CollectionBuilder is a project of University of Idaho Library's [Digital Initiatives](https://www.lib.uidaho.edu/digital/) and the [Center for Digital Inquiry and Learning](https://cdil.lib.uidaho.edu) (CDIL) following the [Lib-Static](https://lib-static.github.io/) methodology. 
Powered by the open source static site generator [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) and a modern static web stack, it puts collection metadata to work building beautiful sites.

The basic theme is created using [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/).
Metadata visualizations are built using open source libraries such as [DataTables](https://datatables.net/), [Leafletjs](http://leafletjs.com/), [Spotlight gallery](https://github.com/nextapps-de/spotlight), [lazysizes](https://github.com/aFarkas/lazysizes), and [Lunr.js](https://lunrjs.com/).
Object metadata is exposed using [Schema.org](http://schema.org) and [Open Graph protocol](http://ogp.me/) standards.

## License
 
This license does *NOT* include any objects or images used in digital collections, which may have individually applied licenses described by a "rights" field.
CollectionBuilder code is licensed [MIT](https://github.com/CollectionBuilder/collectionbuilder-csv/blob/master/LICENSE). 
This license does not include external dependencies included in the `assets/lib` directory, which are covered by their individual licenses.
